

Image Credit 

We are often told things like, "The development of an effective AIDS vaccine has been challenging due to viral genetic diversity and the difficulty in generating broadly neutralizing antibodies (Xu et al. 2017)."


Our immune system evolves the structure of broadly neutralizing antibodies using a process of affinity maturation and somatic hypermutation (Hwang et al. 2017). This is a gradual process which proceeds over many cycles with many mutations to the antibody binding site. If the surface that the antibody is improving it's affinity to suddenly changes, the work that has been done improving the binding to that surface will be lost. The affinity maturation mechanism can however evolve an improved affinity to a surface that is relatively constant. This differential improvement between binding to a changing surface and binding to a constant surface may act to focus the antibody binding on the constant surface.


This might explain how the broadly neutralizing antibody N6 (Huang et al. 2016) became so sharply focused on the CD4 binding site on HIV's gp120 molecule to the point where it binds mostly with a single chain -- the heavy chain. HIV's rapid mutation of unconserved regions of the gp120 molecule creates a changing surface, while the CD4 binding site being more conserved creates a more constant surface.


This suggests a design strategy based on a series of molecules that emulate HIV's behavior as a function of time. The series of molecules should present a constant conserved region and a variable unconserved region to the immune system. We don't know how many different molecules it might take or how long the immune system would need to be exposed to these molecules, but the answer to both questions could be "significant." So to the extent that this kind of evolutionary procedure could be useful in an actual vaccine candidate, we may need to let go of the idea that a vaccine is one type of molecule given once.


Here is an idea of what these molecules might be like: (https://github.com/aequorea/vHIV). We are using a gp120 monomer as the basis of the design, and we are using designed-in glycans to reduce off-target immunogenicity while at the same time allowing for exposure of the CD4 binding site. Variability of the protein surface could be designed in a simple manner similar to the glycosylation algorithm used to select potential glycosylation sites on the gp120 molecule. We could alter the sidechains of solvent exposed residues in the neighborhood of the CD4 binding site. Additionally, one could look at the natural variability of gp120 as seen in the many variants found in HIV patients, and take advantage of it.


If you know of references that relate to this technique, please leave a comment. Thanks!


(10/31/17 - 11/19/17)
